# CHAPTER III – Citizenship

## Article 22. Persons who become citizens on appointed day

_Amended by: XLI.1965.3; III.2000.2._  
(1) Every person who, on the appointed day, is a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies, or a British protected person, and is connected with Malta by virtue of the Malta Citizenship Act 1964, shall become a citizen of Malta on that day.

(2) The following persons shall also become citizens of Malta on the appointed day, that is to say:  
&nbsp;&nbsp;(a) every person born in Malta between the 21st September, 1964 and the date of commencement of this Constitution; and  
&nbsp;&nbsp;(b) every person who, on the date of commencement of this Constitution, is domiciled in Malta and was born outside Malta of a father and a paternal grandfather who were born in Malta.

## Article 23. Persons entitled to be registered as citizens

_Amended by: XLI.1965.3; III.2000.4; III.2000.5._  
(1) Every person born outside Malta between the 21st September, 1964 and the date of commencement of this Constitution who is the child of a father or mother who becomes, or would but for death have become, a citizen of Malta by virtue of article 22 of this Constitution shall, if registered at any time before the 31st July, 1969, become a citizen of Malta from the date of registration.

(2) Every woman who on the date of commencement of this Constitution is or has been married to a person –  
&nbsp;&nbsp;(a) who becomes, or would but for death have become, a citizen of Malta by virtue of article 22 of this Constitution; or  
&nbsp;&nbsp;(b) who, having died before the appointed day, was on the date of his death domiciled in Malta and was born in Malta,  
shall be entitled, upon making application and upon taking the oath of allegiance, to be registered as a citizen of Malta.

## Article 24. Persons naturalized or registered as citizens before appointed day

_Substituted by: LVIII.1974.8. Repealed by: XXIII.1989.3._

## Article 25. Acquisition of citizenship by birth or descent by persons born on or after the appointed day

_Substituted by: LVIII.1974.9. Repealed by: XXIII.1989.4._

## Article 26. Marriage to citizen of Malta

_Substituted by: LVIII.1974.10. Repealed by: XXIII.1989.5._

## Article 27. Dual citizenship

_Substituted by: LVIII.1974.10. Repealed by: XXIII.1989.5._

## Article 28. Commonwealth citizens

_Renumbered by: XXIII.1989.6._

## Article 29. Criminal liability of Commonwealth citizens

_Renumbered by: XXIII.1989.6._

## Article 30. Powers of Parliament

_Repealed by: XXIII.1989.7._

## Article 31. Interpretation

_Amended by: LVIII.1974.10; X.1977.2. Repealed by: XXIII.1989.7._
