# CHAPTER II

## Declaration of Principles

### Article 7 - Right to work.

The State recognises the right of all citizens to work and shall promote such conditions as will make this right effective.

### Article 8 - Promotion of culture, etc.

The State shall promote the development of culture and scientific and technical research.

### Article 9 - Safeguarding of landscape and historical and artistic patrimony.

1.  The State shall safeguard the landscape and the historical and artistic patrimony of the Nation.
2.  The State shall protect and conserve the environment and its resources for the benefit of the present and future generations and shall take measures to address any form of environmental degradation in Malta, including that of air, water and land, and any sort of pollution problem and to promote, nurture and support the right of action in favour of the environment.

### Article 10 - Compulsory and free primary education.

Primary education shall be compulsory and in State schools shall be free of charge.

### Article 11 - Educational interest.

1.  Capable and deserving students, even if without financial resources, are entitled to attain the highest grades of education.
2.  The State shall give effect to this principle by means of scholarships, of contributions to the families of students and other provisions on the basis of competitive examinations.

### Article 12 - Protection of work.

1.  The State shall protect work.
2.  It shall provide for the professional or vocational training and advancement of workers.

### Article 13 - Hours of work.

1.  The maximum number of hours of work per day shall be fixed by law.
2.  The worker is entitled to a weekly day of rest and to annual holidays with pay; he cannot renounce this right.

### Article 14 - Rights of women workers.

The State shall promote the equal right of men and women to enjoy all economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights and for this purpose shall take appropriate measures to eliminate all forms of discrimination between the sexes by any person, organisation or enterprise; the State shall in particular aim at ensuring that women workers enjoy equal rights and the same wages for the same work as men.

### Article 15 - Minimum age for paid labour.

The minimum age for paid labour shall be prescribed by law.

### Article 16 - Safeguarding labour of minors.

The State shall provide for safeguarding the labour of minors and assure to them the right to equal pay for equal work.

### Article 17 - Social assistance and insurance.

1.  Every citizen incapable of work and unprovided with the resources necessary for subsistence is entitled to maintenance and social assistance.
2.  Workers are entitled to reasonable insurance on a contributory basis for their requirements in case of accident, illness, disability, old-age and involuntary unemployment.
3.  Disabled persons and persons incapable of work are entitled to education and vocational training.

### Article 18 - Encouragement of private economic enterprise.

The State shall encourage private economic enterprise.

### Article 19 - Protection of artisan trades.

The State shall provide for the protection and development of artisan trades.

### Article 20 - Encouragement of co-operatives.

The State recognises the social function of co-operatives and shall encourage their development.

### Article 20A - Participation of Maltese citizens living abroad.

The State shall facilitate the participation of Maltese citizens who live abroad in the political, social, economic and cultural life of Malta.

### Article 21 - Application of the principles contained in this Chapter.

The provisions of this Chapter shall not be enforceable in any court, but the principles therein contained are nevertheless fundamental to the governance of the country and it shall be the aim of the State to apply these principles in making laws.
