# Chapter V

## The President

### Article 48 - Establishment of the office of President.

(1) There shall be a President of Malta who shall be appointed by resolution of the House of Representatives supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members thereof.
(2) The President shall hold office for a period of five years from the date of his appointment and shall be eligible for re-appointment once only:
Provided that -
(a) the President may, at any time, resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker of the House of Representatives;
(b) the President may be removed from office by resolution of the House of Representatives supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members thereof and praying for such removal on the grounds of proved inability to perform functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or proved misbehaviour:
Provided that Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the presentation of an address and for the investigation and proof of the inability or misbehaviour of the holder of the office under the provisions of this paragraph.
(3) A person assuming the office of President shall, before entering upon that office, take and subscribe the oath of office set out in the Second Schedule to this Constitution.

### Article 49 - Discharge of President's functions during vacancy, etc.

Whenever the office of President is temporarily vacant, and until a new President is appointed, and whenever the holder of the office is absent from Malta or on vacation or is for any reason unable to perform the functions conferred upon him by this Constitution, those functions shall be performed by such person as the Prime Minister, after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition, may appoint or, if there is no person in Malta so appointed and able to perform those functions, by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.

### Article 50 - Oath to be taken by the President.

A person appointed to or assuming the functions of the office of President shall, before entering upon that office, take and subscribe the oath of office set out in the Second Schedule to this Constitution.
Any person appointed to the office of President under sub-article (1) of article 48 of this Constitution shall take the oath of office before the House.
