# CHAPTER IX

# Finance

## Article 102 - Consolidated Fund.

(1) All revenues and other moneys raised or received by Malta (not being revenues or other moneys payable into some other fund, being a fund established by or under any law for the time being in force in Malta for a specific purpose) shall, unless Parliament otherwise provides, be paid into and form one Consolidated Fund.
(2) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except to meet expenditure that is charged upon the Fund by this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force in Malta or where the issue of those moneys has been authorised by an Appropriation Act or under article 104 of this Constitution.
(3) No moneys shall be withdrawn from any public fund other than the Consolidated Fund unless the issue of those moneys has been authorised by or under any law for the time being in force in Malta.
(4) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund or any other public fund except in the manner prescribed by or under any law.
(5) The costs, charges and expenses incidental to the collection and management of the Consolidated Fund shall be a charge on the Fund.

## Article 103 - Authorisation of expenditure from Consolidated Fund.

(1) The Minister responsible for finance shall cause to be prepared and laid before the House of Representatives before, or not later than thirty days after, the commencement of each financial year estimates of the revenues and expenditure of Malta for that year.
(2) The heads of expenditure contained in the estimates (other than the expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund by this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force in Malta) shall be included in a bill, to be known as an appropriation bill, providing for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums for the purposes specified therein.
(3) If in respect of any financial year it is found -
(a) that the amount appropriated by the Appropriation Act for any purpose is insufficient, or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; or
(b) that any moneys have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount (if any) appropriated for the purpose by that Act,
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the House of Representatives and the heads of any such expenditure shall be included in a supplementary appropriation bill.

## Article 104 - Authorisation of expenditure before appropriation.

Parliament may make provision under which, if the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the Minister responsible for finance may authorise the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the purpose of meeting such expenditure as he may consider necessary to carry on the government of Malta until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the Act, whichever is the earlier.

## Article 105 - Contingencies Fund.

(1) Parliament may provide for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund and for authorising the Minister responsible for finance, if he is satisfied that there has arisen an urgent and unforeseen need for expenditure for which no other provision exists, to make advances from that Fund to meet that need.
(2) Where any advance is made in accordance with sub-article (1) of this article a supplementary estimate shall be presented and a supplementary appropriation bill shall be introduced as soon as practicable for the purpose of replacing the amount so advanced.

## Article 106 - Public debt.

(1) The public debt of Malta shall be a charge upon the Consolidated Fund and other public funds of Malta.
(2) In this article references to the public debt of Malta include references to the interest on that debt, sinking fund payments and redemption moneys in respect of that debt and the costs, charges and expenses incidental to the management of that debt.

## Article 107 - Remuneration in respect of certain offices.

(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of articles 101A and 101B, there shall be paid to the holders of the offices to which this article applies such salaries as may be prescribed by or under any law.
(2) The salaries and any allowances payable to the holders of the offices to which this article applies shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund.
(3) The salary payable to the holder of any office to which this article applies and his terms of office, other than allowances, shall not be altered to his disadvantage after his appointment, and for the purposes of this sub-article, in so far as the salary or the terms of service of any person depend upon the option of that person, the salary or terms for which he opts shall be deemed to be more advantageous to him than any others for which he might have opted.
(4) This article applies to the offices referred to in articles 48, 91, 95(6), 100, 109, 118 and 120 of the Constitution.

## Article 108 - Auditor General.

(1) There shall be an Auditor General whose office shall be a public office who shall have the functions as provided in the following provisions of this article.
(2) The Auditor General shall be an officer of the House of Representatives and shall be appointed by the President acting in accordance with a resolution of the House of Representatives supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members in the House:
Provided that when a person who is not a member of the House of Representatives is elected to be the Speaker of the House of Representatives, he shall not be treated as a member of the House for the purpose of establishing the majority required by this sub-article.
(3) (a) Subject to the provisions of sub-article (4) of this article the Auditor General shall hold office for a period of five years from the date of his appointment and shall be eligible for reappointment for one further period of five years.
(b) Where the Auditor General has been appointed from among public officers and at the end of his appointment is below the retiring age in the public service, the person so appointed shall revert to the public service and shall continue to enjoy the salary and allowances referred to in sub-article (6).
(c) It shall not be lawful for the Auditor General, during his tenure of such office, to hold any other office of profit or otherwise with the Government of Malta or with any commercial or professional venture whatsoever.
(4) (a) The Auditor General may at any time be removed or suspended from his office by the President, upon an address from the House of Representatives supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all members in the House, praying for such removal on the ground of proved inability to perform the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or proved misbehaviour, and the provisions of the proviso to sub-article (2) of this article shall also apply for the purpose of establishing the majority required under this sub-article.
(b) At any time when Parliament is not in session, the Auditor General may be suspended from his office by the President, acting in accordance with his own deliberate judgement, for inability to perform the functions of his office or misbehaviour proved to the satisfaction of the President; but any such suspension shall not continue in force beyond two months after the beginning of the next session of Parliament.
(5) The accounts -
(a) of all departments and offices of the Government of Malta, including the office of the Public Service Commission, and the office of the Clerk of the House of Representatives and of all Superior and Inferior Courts of Malta, and
(b) of such other public authorities or other bodies administering, holding, or using funds belonging directly or indirectly to the Government of Malta as may be prescribed by or under any law for the time being in force in Malta,
shall be audited and reported upon annually by the Auditor General to the House of Representatives and for that purpose the Auditor General or any person authorised by him in that behalf shall have access to all books, records, returns and other documents relating to those accounts.
(6) (a) There shall be paid to the Auditor General such salary and such allowances as may from time to time be prescribed or allowed for a Judge of the Superior Courts.
(b) Such salary and allowances shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund and the provisions of sub-article (3) of article 107 of the Constitution shall apply to such salary.
(7) The Auditor General shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed before the President the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by any law for the time being in force in Malta.
(8) Parliament may by law from time to time provide for the manner in which the reports of the Auditor General shall be made.
(9) (a) There shall also be a Deputy Auditor General whose office shall be a public office and who shall have such functions as the Auditor General may from time to time delegate to him and who shall, whenever the office of Auditor General is temporarily vacant, and until a new Auditor General is appointed, and whenever the holder of the office is absent from Malta or on vacation or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, perform the functions of Auditor General.
(b) The provisions of sub-article (2), paragraphs (a) and (c) of sub-article (3), sub-article (4), paragraph (b) of sub-article (6) and sub-article (7) of this article shall apply to the Deputy Auditor General.
(c) There shall be paid to the Deputy Auditor General such salary and such allowances as may from time to time be prescribed or allowed to a Magistrate of the Inferior Courts.
(d) Where the Deputy Auditor General has been appointed from among public officers and at the end of his appointment is below the retiring age in the public service, the person so appointed shall revert to the public service and shall continue to enjoy the salary and allowances referred to in this sub-article.
(10) (a) There shall be a National Audit Office consisting of the Auditor General, who shall be the head of that office, the Deputy Auditor General and such other officers, appointed by the Auditor General, as the Auditor General may consider necessary to assist him in the proper discharge of his office, and the provisions of article 110 of this Constitution shall not apply to the officers appointed to the National Audit Office.
(b) Parliament may from time to time by law provide for the manner in which funds shall be allocated to the National Audit Office and in the manner whereby the accounts of the National Audit Office shall be audited and reported upon.
(11) Nothing in this article shall be construed as precluding the grant of any other functions or powers on the Auditor General or the National Audit Office by or under any law for the time being in force.
(12) In the exercise of their functions under the Constitution the Auditor General and the Deputy Auditor General shall not be subject to the authority or control of any person.
