# CHAPTER X – The Public Service

## Article 109. Public Service Commission

There shall be a Public Service Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and such number of other members as may be prescribed by any law for the time being in force in Malta.

## Article 110. Appointment, etc. of public officers

Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, power to appoint persons to hold or act in public offices and to remove or exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in any such offices shall vest in the Public Service Commission.

## Article 111. Principal representatives of Malta abroad

Power to appoint persons to hold or act in the office of Principal Representative of Malta in any other country shall vest in the President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister.

## Article 112. Appointment on transfer in respect of certain offices

The provisions of article 110 shall apply in relation to appointment to an office on transfer from another office of equal rank in the same service or from an office of equal rank in another service in the public service.

## Article 113. Protection of pension rights

1. Subject to any law for the time being in force in Malta, the law applicable to any benefits that were being enjoyed by a public officer prior to the appointed day shall continue in force.
2. Where any person is entitled to receive such a benefit from the Government, that benefit shall be paid from the Consolidated Fund.

## Article 114. Grant and withholding of pensions, etc.

1. The law to be applied in relation to any pensions benefits granted to any public officer shall be the law in force on the date of his retirement or, if it is more favourable, the law in force at a later date.
2. Any decision of the authority empowered to grant or withhold any such benefit shall be subject to such right of appeal or other legal remedy as may be prescribed by any law for the time being in force in Malta.

## Article 115. Protection of Public Service Commission from legal proceedings

No legal proceedings shall lie against the Public Service Commission or any member thereof for anything done in good faith in the exercise of its or his functions under this Constitution.
