# CHAPTER IX – Finance

## Article 102. Consolidated Fund

All revenues or other moneys raised or received by Malta (not being revenues or other moneys payable into some other fund established by law for a specific purpose) shall be paid into and form one Consolidated Fund.

## Article 103. Authorisation of expenditure from Consolidated Fund

No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except to meet expenditure that is charged upon the Fund by this Constitution or by any law for the time being in force in Malta or where the issue of those moneys has been authorised by an Appropriation Act or under article 104 of this Constitution.

## Article 104. Authorisation of expenditure before appropriation

If the Appropriation Act for any financial year has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the Minister responsible for finance may authorise the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is the earlier.

## Article 105. Contingencies Fund

An Act of Parliament may provide for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund and for authorising the Minister responsible for finance, if satisfied that there has arisen an urgent and unforeseen need for expenditure for which no other provision exists, to make advances from that Fund to meet that need.

## Article 106. Public debt

1. The public debt of Malta shall be secured on the Consolidated Fund and the repayment of the principal and the payment of interest on that debt shall have priority over all other charges on the Fund.
2. For the purposes of this article, the public debt includes interest on that debt, sinking fund payments in respect of that debt, the cost of issue of that debt and any redemption premium payable in respect thereof.

## Article 107. Remuneration in respect of certain offices

Where any remuneration or allowance is prescribed by or under any law for the holder of any office to which this article applies, that remuneration or allowance shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund.

## Article 108. Auditor General

There shall be an Auditor General whose office shall be a public office and who shall have such powers and duties as may be prescribed by or under any law for the time being in force in Malta.
