# CHAPTER II – Declaration of Principles

## Article 7. Right to work

The State recognises the right of all citizens to work and shall promote such conditions as will make this right effective.

## Article 8. Promotion of culture, etc.

The State shall promote the development of culture and scientific and technical research.

## Article 9. Safeguarding of landscape and historical and artistic patrimony

The State shall safeguard the landscape and the historical and artistic patrimony of the Nation.

_Amended by: XXII.2018.2._

## Article 10. Compulsory and free primary education

Primary education shall be compulsory and in State schools shall be provided free of charge.

## Article 11. Educational interest

(1) The State shall encourage private educational initiative.

(2) The State shall, in particular, establish scholarships and schemes to provide financial assistance to deserving students on the basis of competitive examinations.

## Article 12. Protection of work

The State shall protect work.

## Article 13. Hours of work

The State shall encourage the availability of work under favourable conditions and shall ensure to workers reasonable rest periods and holidays with pay.

## Article 14. Rights of women workers

The State shall promote the equal right of men and women to enjoy all economic, social and cultural benefits.

_Amended by: XIX.1991.2._

## Article 15. Minimum age for paid labour

Children shall not be employed in any industrial undertaking or in any occupation contrary to law.

## Article 16. Safeguarding labour of minors

The State shall provide for safeguarding the labour of minors and assure to minors, children and young persons the enjoyment of just conditions of work.

## Article 17. Social assistance and insurance

(1) Every citizen unable to work or lacking the resources necessary for his or her maintenance has the right to maintenance and social assistance.

(2) The State shall provide for such assistance and benefits as may be required.

## Article 18. Encouragement of private economic enterprise

The State shall encourage private economic enterprise, and shall provide necessary aids and facilities for its development.

## Article 19. Protection of artisan trades

The State shall promote the development of artisan trades and local crafts, and shall assure their protection.

## Article 20. Encouragement of co-operatives

The State shall encourage the development of co-operatives, and shall, by laws applicable to all co-operative organisations, provide for the management of co-operatives by the members thereof.

## Article 20A. Participation of Maltese citizens living abroad

_Added by: XX.2011.12._  
The State shall facilitate the participation of Maltese citizens who live abroad in the political, social, economic and cultural life of Malta.

## Article 21. Application of the principles contained in this Chapter

The provisions of this Chapter shall not be enforceable in any court, but the principles therein contained are nevertheless fundamental to the governance of the country and it shall be the aim of the State to apply these principles in making laws.
